Write-Ahead Logging
Small. Fast. Reliable.
Choose any three.
Home
Menu
About
Documentation
Download
License
Support
Purchase
Search
About
Documentation
Download
Support
Purchase
Search Documentation
Search Changelog
Write-Ahead Logging
Table Of Contents
1. Overview
2. How WAL Works
2.1. Checkpointing
2.2. Concurrency
2.3. Performance Considerations
3. Activating And Configuring WAL Mode
3.1. Automatic Checkpoint
3.2. Application-Initiated Checkpoints
3.3. Persistence of WAL mode
4. The WAL File
5. Read-Only Databases
6. Avoiding Excessively Large WAL Files
7. Implementation Of Shared-Memory For The WAL-Index
8. Use of WAL Without Shared-Memory
9. Sometimes Queries Return SQLITE_BUSY In WAL Mode
10. Backwards Compatibility
11. The WAL-Reset Bug
11.1. Bug Details
11.2. Low Probability Of Occurrence
1.
Overview
The default method by which SQLite implements
atomic commit and rollback
is a
rollback journal
.
Beginning with
version 3.7.0
(2010-07-21), a new "Write-Ahead Log" option
(hereafter referred to as "WAL") is available.
There are advantages and disadvantages to using WAL instead of
a rollback journal.  Advantages include:
WAL is significantly faster in most scenarios.
WAL provides more concurrency as readers do not block writers and 
    a writer does not block readers.  Reading and writing can proceed 
    concurrently.
Disk I/O operations tends to be more sequential using WAL.
WAL uses many fewer fsync() operations and is thus less vulnerable to
    problems on systems where the fsync() system call is broken.
But there are also disadvantages:
All processes using a database must be on the same host computer;
    WAL does not work over a network filesystem.  This is because WAL requires
    all processes to share a small amount of memory and processes on
    separate host machines obviously cannot share memory with each other.
Transactions that involve changes against multiple
ATTACHed
databases are atomic for each individual database, but are not
    atomic across all databases as a set.
It is not possible to change the
page_size
after entering WAL
    mode, either on an empty database or by using
VACUUM
or by restoring
    from a backup using the
backup API
.  You must be in a rollback journal
    mode to change the page size.
It is not possible to open
read-only WAL databases
.
    The opening process must have write privileges for "
-shm
"
wal-index
shared memory file associated with the database, if that
    file exists, or else write access on the directory containing
    the database file if the "
-shm
" file does not exist.
Beginning with
version 3.22.0
(2018-01-22), a read-only 
    WAL-mode database file can be opened if
    the
-shm
and
-wal
files
    already exist or those files can be created or the
database is immutable
.
WAL might be very slightly slower (perhaps 1% or 2% slower)
    than the traditional rollback-journal approach
    in applications that do mostly reads and seldom write.
There is an additional quasi-persistent "
-wal
" file and
    "
-shm
" shared memory file associated with each
    database, which can make SQLite less appealing for use as an
application file-format
.
There is the extra operation of
checkpointing
which, though automatic
    by default, is still something that application developers need to
    be mindful of.
WAL works best with smaller transactions.  WAL does
    not work well for very large transactions.  For transactions larger than
    about 100 megabytes, traditional rollback journal modes will likely
    be faster.  For transactions in excess of a gigabyte, WAL mode may 
    fail with an I/O or disk-full error.
    It is recommended that one of the rollback journal modes be used for
    transactions larger than a few dozen megabytes.
Beginning with
version 3.11.0
(2016-02-15), 
    WAL mode works as efficiently with
    large transactions as does rollback mode.
2.
How WAL Works
The traditional rollback journal works by writing a copy of the
original unchanged database content into a separate rollback journal file
and then writing changes directly into the database file.  In the
event of a crash or
ROLLBACK
, the original content contained in the
rollback journal is played back into the database file to
revert the database file to its original state.  The
COMMIT
occurs
when the rollback journal is deleted.
The WAL approach inverts this.  The original content is preserved
in the database file and the changes are appended into a separate
WAL file.  A
COMMIT
occurs when a special record indicating a commit
is appended to the WAL.  Thus a COMMIT can happen without ever writing
to the original database, which allows readers to continue operating
from the original unaltered database while changes are simultaneously being
committed into the WAL.  Multiple transactions can be appended to the
end of a single WAL file.
2.1.
Checkpointing
Of course, one wants to eventually transfer all the transactions that
are appended in the WAL file back into the original database.  Moving
the WAL file transactions back into the database is called a
"
checkpoint
".
Another way to think about the difference between rollback and 
write-ahead log is that in the rollback-journal
approach, there are two primitive operations, reading and writing,
whereas with a write-ahead log
there are now three primitive operations:  reading, writing, and
checkpointing.
By default, SQLite does a checkpoint automatically when the WAL file
reaches a threshold size of 1000 pages.  (The
SQLITE_DEFAULT_WAL_AUTOCHECKPOINT
compile-time option can be used to
specify a different default.) Applications using WAL do
not have to do anything in order for these checkpoints to occur.  
But if they want to, applications can adjust the automatic checkpoint
threshold.  Or they can turn off the automatic checkpoints and run 
checkpoints during idle moments or in a separate thread or process.
2.2.
Concurrency
When a read operation begins on a WAL-mode database, it first
remembers the location of the last valid commit record in the WAL.
Call this point the "end mark".  Because the WAL can be growing and
adding new commit records while various readers connect to the database,
each reader can potentially have its own end mark.  But for any
particular reader, the end mark is unchanged for the duration of the
transaction, thus ensuring that a single read transaction only sees
the database content as it existed at a single point in time.
When a reader needs a page of content, it first checks the WAL to
see if that page appears there, and if so it pulls in the last copy
of the page that occurs in the WAL prior to the reader's end mark.
If no copy of the page exists in the WAL prior to the reader's end mark,
then the page is read from the original database file.  Readers can
exist in separate processes, so to avoid forcing every reader to scan
the entire WAL looking for pages (the WAL file can grow to
multiple megabytes, depending on how often checkpoints are run), a
data structure called the "wal-index" is maintained in shared memory
which helps readers locate pages in the WAL quickly and with a minimum
of I/O.  The wal-index greatly improves the performance of readers,
but the use of shared memory means that all readers must exist on the
same machine.  This is why the write-ahead log implementation will not
work on a network filesystem.
Writers merely append new content to the end of the WAL file.
Because writers do nothing that would interfere with the actions of
readers, writers and readers can run at the same time.  However,
since there is only one WAL file, there can only be one writer at
a time.
A checkpoint operation takes content from the WAL file
and transfers it back into the original database file.
A checkpoint can run concurrently with readers, however the checkpoint
must stop when it reaches a page in the WAL that is past the end mark
of any current reader.  The checkpoint has to stop at that point because
otherwise it might overwrite part of the database file that the reader
is actively using.  The checkpoint remembers (in the wal-index) how far
it got and will resume transferring content from the WAL to the database
from where it left off on the next invocation.
Thus a long-running read transaction can prevent a checkpointer from
making progress.  But presumably every read transaction will eventually
end and the checkpointer will be able to continue.
Whenever a write operation occurs, the writer checks how much progress
the checkpointer has made, and if the entire WAL has been transferred into
the database and synced and if no readers are making use of the WAL, then
the writer will rewind the WAL back to the beginning and start putting new
transactions at the beginning of the WAL.  This mechanism prevents a WAL
file from growing without bound.
2.3.
Performance Considerations
Write transactions are very fast since they only involve writing
the content once (versus twice for rollback-journal transactions)
and because the writes are all sequential.  Further, syncing the
content to the disk is not required, as long as the application is
willing to sacrifice durability following a power loss or hard reboot.
(Writers sync the WAL on every transaction commit if
PRAGMA synchronous
is set to FULL but omit this sync if
PRAGMA synchronous
is set to NORMAL.)
On the other hand, read performance deteriorates as the WAL file
grows in size since each reader must check the WAL file for the content
and the time needed to check the WAL file is proportional
to the size of the WAL file.  The wal-index helps find content
in the WAL file much faster, but performance still falls off with
increasing WAL file size.  Hence, to maintain good read performance 
it is important to keep the WAL file size down by
running checkpoints at regular intervals.
Checkpointing does require sync operations in order to avoid
the possibility of database corruption following a power loss
or hard reboot.  The WAL must be synced to persistent storage
prior to moving content from the WAL into the database and the
database file must be synced prior to resetting the WAL.
Checkpoint also requires more seeking.
The checkpointer makes an effort to
do as many sequential page writes to the database as it can (the pages
are transferred from WAL to database in ascending order) but even
then there will typically be many seek operations interspersed among
the page writes.  These factors combine to make checkpoints slower than
write transactions.
The default strategy is to allow successive write transactions to
grow the WAL until the WAL becomes about 1000 pages in size, then to
run a checkpoint operation for each subsequent COMMIT until the WAL
is reset to be smaller than 1000 pages.  By default, the checkpoint will be
run automatically by the same thread that does the COMMIT that pushes
the WAL over its size limit.  This has the effect of causing most
COMMIT operations to be very fast but an occasional COMMIT (those that trigger
a checkpoint) to be much slower.  If that effect is undesirable, then
the application can disable automatic checkpointing and run the
periodic checkpoints in a separate thread, or separate process.
(Links to commands and interfaces to accomplish this are
shown below
.)
Note that with
PRAGMA synchronous
set to NORMAL, the checkpoint
is the only operation to issue an I/O barrier or sync operation
(fsync() on unix or FlushFileBuffers() on windows).  If an application
therefore runs checkpoint in a separate thread or process, the main
thread or process that is doing database queries and updates will never
block on a sync operation.  This helps to prevent "latch-up" in applications
running on a busy disk drive.  The downside to
this configuration is that transactions are no longer durable and
might rollback following a power failure or hard reset.
Notice too that there is a tradeoff between average read performance
and average write performance.  To maximize the read performance,
one wants to keep the WAL as small as possible and hence run checkpoints
frequently, perhaps as often as every COMMIT.  To maximize
write performance, one wants to amortize the cost of each checkpoint
over as many writes as possible, meaning that one wants to run checkpoints
infrequently and let the WAL grow as large as possible before each 
checkpoint.  The decision of how often to run checkpoints may therefore
vary from one application to another depending on the relative read
and write performance requirements of the application.
The default strategy is to run a checkpoint once the WAL
reaches 1000 pages and this strategy seems to work well in test applications on 
workstations, but other strategies might work better on different 
platforms or for different workloads.
3.
Activating And Configuring WAL Mode
An SQLite database connection defaults to
journal_mode=DELETE
.  To convert to WAL mode, use the
following pragma:
PRAGMA journal_mode=WAL;
The journal_mode pragma returns a string which is the new journal mode.
On success, the pragma will return the string "
wal
".  If 
the conversion to WAL could not be completed (for example, if the
VFS
does not support the necessary shared-memory primitives) then the
journaling mode will be unchanged and the string returned from the
primitive will be the prior journaling mode (for example "
delete
").
3.1.
Automatic Checkpoint
By default, SQLite will automatically checkpoint whenever a
COMMIT
occurs that causes the WAL file to be 1000 pages or more in size, or when the 
last database connection on a database file closes.  The default 
configuration is intended to work well for most applications.
But programs that want more control can force a checkpoint
using the
wal_checkpoint pragma
or by calling the
sqlite3_wal_checkpoint()
C interface.  The automatic checkpoint
threshold can be changed or automatic checkpointing can be completely
disabled using the
wal_autocheckpoint pragma
or by calling the
sqlite3_wal_autocheckpoint()
C interface.  A program can also 
use
sqlite3_wal_hook()
to register a callback to be invoked whenever
any transaction commits to the WAL.  This callback can then invoke
sqlite3_wal_checkpoint()
or
sqlite3_wal_checkpoint_v2()
based on whatever
criteria it thinks is appropriate.  (The automatic checkpoint mechanism
is implemented as a simple wrapper around
sqlite3_wal_hook()
.)
3.2.
Application-Initiated Checkpoints
An application can initiate a checkpoint using any writable database
connection on the database simply by invoking
sqlite3_wal_checkpoint()
or
sqlite3_wal_checkpoint_v2()
.
There are three subtypes of checkpoints that vary in their aggressiveness:
PASSIVE, FULL, and RESTART.  The default checkpoint style is PASSIVE, which
does as much work as it can without interfering with other database
connections, and which might not run to completion if there are
concurrent readers or writers.
All checkpoints initiated by
sqlite3_wal_checkpoint()
and
by the automatic checkpoint mechanism are PASSIVE.  FULL and RESTART
checkpoints try harder to run the checkpoint to completion and can only
be initiated by a call to
sqlite3_wal_checkpoint_v2()
.  See the
sqlite3_wal_checkpoint_v2()
documentation for additional information
on FULL and RESET checkpoints.
3.3.
Persistence of WAL mode
Unlike the other journaling modes,
PRAGMA journal_mode=WAL
is
persistent.  If a process sets WAL mode, then closes and reopens the
database, the database will come back in WAL mode.  In contrast, if
a process sets (for example) PRAGMA journal_mode=TRUNCATE and then closes and
reopens the database will come back up in the default rollback mode of
DELETE rather than the previous TRUNCATE setting.
The persistence of WAL mode means that applications can be converted
to using SQLite in WAL mode without making any changes to the application
itself.  One has merely to run "
PRAGMA journal_mode=WAL;
" on the
database file(s) using the
command-line shell
or other utility, then
restart the application.
The WAL journal mode will be set on all
connections to the same database file if it is set on any one connection.
4.
The WAL File
While a
database connection
is open on a WAL-mode database, SQLite
maintains an extra journal file called a "Write Ahead Log" or "WAL File".
The name of this file on disk is usually the name of the database file
with an extra "
-wal
" suffix, though different naming rules may
apply if SQLite is compiled with
SQLITE_ENABLE_8_3_NAMES
.
The WAL file exists for as long as any
database connection
has the
database open.  Usually, the WAL file is deleted automatically when the
last connection to the database closes.  However, if the last process to
have the database open exits without cleanly
shutting down the database connection, or if the
SQLITE_FCNTL_PERSIST_WAL
file control
is used, then the WAL file
might be retained on disk after all connections to the database have
been closed.  The WAL file is part of the persistent state of the
database and should be kept with the database if the database is copied
or moved.  If a database file is separated from its WAL file, then
transactions that were previously committed to the database might be lost,
or the database file might become corrupted.
The only safe way to remove a WAL file is
to open the database file using one of the
sqlite3_open()
interfaces
then immediately close the database using
sqlite3_close()
.
The
WAL file format
is precisely defined and is cross-platform.
5.
Read-Only Databases
Older versions of SQLite could not read a WAL-mode database that was
read-only.  In other words, write access was required in order to read a
WAL-mode database.  This constraint was relaxed beginning with
SQLite
version 3.22.0
(2018-01-22).
On newer versions of SQLite,
a WAL-mode database on read-only media, or a WAL-mode database that lacks
write permission, can still be read as long as one or more of the following
conditions are met:
The
-shm
and
-wal
files already exist and are readable.
There is write permission on the directory containing the database so
    that the
-shm
and
-wal
files can be created.
The database connection is opened using the
immutable query parameter
.
Even though it is possible to open a read-only WAL-mode database,
it is good practice to convert the database to
PRAGMA journal_mode=DELETE
prior to burning an
SQLite database image onto read-only media.
6.
Avoiding Excessively Large WAL Files
In normal cases, new content is appended to the WAL file until the
WAL file accumulates about 1000 pages (and is thus about 4MB 
in size) at which point a checkpoint is automatically run and the WAL file
is recycled.  The checkpoint does not normally truncate the WAL file
(unless the
journal_size_limit pragma
is set).  Instead, it merely
causes SQLite to start overwriting the WAL file from the beginning.
This is done because it is normally faster to overwrite an existing file
than to append.  When the last connection to a database closes, that
connection does one last checkpoint and then deletes the WAL and its
associated shared-memory file, to clean up the disk.
So in the vast majority of cases, applications need not worry about
the WAL file at all.  SQLite will automatically take care of it.  But
it is possible to get SQLite into a state where the WAL file will grow
without bound, causing excess disk space usage and slow query speeds.
The following bullets enumerate some of the ways that this can happen
and how to avoid them.
Disabling the automatic checkpoint mechanism.
In its default configuration, SQLite will checkpoint the WAL file at the
conclusion of any transaction when the WAL file is more than 1000 pages
long.  However, compile-time and run-time options exist that can disable
or defer this automatic checkpoint.  If an application disables the
automatic checkpoint, then there is nothing to prevent the WAL file
from growing excessively.
Checkpoint starvation.
A checkpoint is only able to run to completion, and reset the WAL file,
if there are no other database connections using the WAL file.  If another
connection has a read transaction open,
then the checkpoint cannot reset the WAL file because
doing so might delete content out from under the reader.
The checkpoint will do as much work as it can without upsetting the
reader, but it cannot run to completion.
The checkpoint will start up again where it left off after the next
write transaction.  This repeats until some checkpoint is able to complete.
However, if a database has many concurrent overlapping readers
and there is always at least one active reader, then
no checkpoints will be able to complete
and hence the WAL file will grow without bound.
This scenario can be avoided by ensuring that there are "reader gaps":
times when no processes are reading from the 
database and that checkpoints are attempted during those times.
In applications with many concurrent readers, one might also consider 
running manual checkpoints with the
SQLITE_CHECKPOINT_RESTART
or
SQLITE_CHECKPOINT_TRUNCATE
option which will ensure that the checkpoint
runs to completion before returning.  The disadvantage of using
SQLITE_CHECKPOINT_RESTART
and
SQLITE_CHECKPOINT_TRUNCATE
is that
readers might block while the checkpoint is running.
Very large write transactions.
A checkpoint can only complete when no other transactions are running, 
which means the WAL file cannot be reset in the middle of a write
transaction.  So a large change to a large database
might result in a large WAL file.  The WAL file will be checkpointed
once the write transaction completes (assuming there are no other readers
blocking it) but in the meantime, the file can grow very big.
As of SQLite
version 3.11.0
(2016-02-15), 
the WAL file for a single transaction
should be proportional in size to the transaction itself.  Pages that
are changed by the transaction should only be written into the WAL file
once.  However, with older versions of SQLite, the same page might be
written into the WAL file multiple times if the transaction grows larger
than the page cache.
7.
Implementation Of Shared-Memory For The WAL-Index
The
wal-index
is implemented using an ordinary file that is
mmapped for robustness.  Early (pre-release) implementations of WAL mode
stored the wal-index in volatile shared-memory, such as files created in
/dev/shm on Linux or /tmp on other unix systems.  The problem
with that approach is that processes with a different root directory
(changed via
chroot
)
will see different files and hence use different shared memory areas,
leading to database corruption.  Other methods for creating nameless
shared memory blocks are not portable across the various flavors of
unix.  And we could not find any method to create nameless shared
memory blocks on windows.  The only way we have found to guarantee
that all processes accessing the same database file use the same shared
memory is to create the shared memory by mmapping a file in the same
directory as the database itself.
Using an ordinary disk file to provide shared memory has the 
disadvantage that it might actually do unnecessary disk I/O by
writing the shared memory to disk.  However, the developers do not
think this is a major concern since the wal-index rarely exceeds
32 KiB in size and is never synced.  Furthermore, the wal-index 
backing file is deleted when the last database connection disconnects,
which often prevents any real disk I/O from ever happening.
Specialized applications for which the default implementation of
shared memory is unacceptable can devise alternative methods via a
custom
VFS
.  
For example, if it is known that a particular database
will only be accessed by threads within a single process, the wal-index
can be implemented using heap memory instead of true shared memory.
8.
Use of WAL Without Shared-Memory
Beginning in SQLite
version 3.7.4
(2010-12-07), 
WAL databases can be created, read, and
written even if shared memory is unavailable as long as the
locking_mode
is set to EXCLUSIVE before the first attempted access.
In other words, a process can interact with
a WAL database without using shared memory if that
process is guaranteed to be the only process accessing the database.
This feature allows WAL databases to be created, read, and written
by legacy
VFSes
that lack the "version 2" shared-memory
methods xShmMap, xShmLock, xShmBarrier, and xShmUnmap on the
sqlite3_io_methods
object.
If
EXCLUSIVE locking mode
is set prior to the first WAL-mode 
database access, then SQLite never attempts to call any of the
shared-memory methods and hence no shared-memory
wal-index is ever created.
In that case, the database connection remains in EXCLUSIVE mode
as long as the journal mode is WAL; attempts to change the locking
mode using "
PRAGMA locking_mode=NORMAL;
" are no-ops.
The only way to change out of EXCLUSIVE locking mode is to first
change out of WAL journal mode.
If NORMAL locking mode is in effect for the first WAL-mode database
access, then the shared-memory wal-index is created.  This means that the
underlying VFS must support the "version 2" shared-memory.
If the VFS does not support shared-memory methods, then the attempt to
open a database that is already in WAL mode, or the attempt to convert a
database into WAL mode, will fail.
As long as exactly one connection is using a shared-memory wal-index, 
the locking mode can be changed freely between NORMAL and EXCLUSIVE.  
It is only when the shared-memory wal-index is omitted, when the locking 
mode is EXCLUSIVE prior to the first WAL-mode database access, that the 
locking mode is stuck in EXCLUSIVE.
9.
Sometimes Queries Return SQLITE_BUSY In WAL Mode
The
second advantage of WAL-mode
is that
writers do not block readers and readers do not block writers.
This is
mostly
true.
But there are some obscure cases where a query against a WAL-mode
database can return
SQLITE_BUSY
, so applications should be prepared
for that happenstance.
Cases where a query against a WAL-mode database can return
SQLITE_BUSY
include the following:
If another database connection has the database mode open
in
exclusive locking mode
then all queries against the
database will return
SQLITE_BUSY
.  Both Chrome and Firefox open their
database files in exclusive locking mode, so attempts to read Chrome or
Firefox databases while the applications are running will run into this
problem, for example.
When the last connection to a particular database is closing,
that connection will acquire an exclusive lock for a short time while
it cleans up the WAL and shared-memory files.  If a separate attempt
is made to open and query the database while the first connection is
still in the middle of its cleanup process, the second connection
might get an
SQLITE_BUSY
error.
If the last connection to a database crashed, then the first new
connection to open the database will start a recovery process.  An
exclusive lock is held during recovery.  So if a third database connection
tries to jump in and query while the second connection is running recovery,
the third connection will get an
SQLITE_BUSY
error.
10.
Backwards Compatibility
The database file format is unchanged for WAL mode.  However, the
WAL file and the
wal-index
are new concepts and so older versions of 
SQLite will not know
how to recover a crashed SQLite database that was operating in WAL mode
when the crash occurred.
To prevent older versions of SQLite (prior to version 3.7.0, 2010-07-22)
from trying to recover
a WAL-mode database (and making matters worse) the database file format
version numbers (bytes 18 and 19 in the
database header
)
are increased from 1 to 2 in WAL mode.
Thus, if an older version of SQLite attempts to connect to an SQLite
database that is operating in WAL mode, it will report an error along
the lines of "file is encrypted or is not a database".
One can explicitly change out of WAL mode using a pragma such as
this:
PRAGMA journal_mode=DELETE;
Deliberately changing out of WAL mode changes the database file format
version numbers back to 1 so that older versions of SQLite can once again 
access the database file.
11.
The WAL-Reset Bug
On 2026-03-03, one of the SQLite developers (Dan) found and fixed
a bug that could, in rare cases, lead to database corruption.  We call 
this the "WAL-reset bug". 
Key points:
The bug is likely present in all version of SQLite from
3.7.0 (2010-07-21) through 3.51.2 (2026-01-09).  It is
fixed in version 3.51.3 (2026-03-13) and later.  Backports of the fix
are available for some earlier releases:
3.44.6
and
3.50.7
.
The bug only affects databases in WAL mode when there are two or more
database connections open on the same file, in separate threads or processes,
and when those two connections attempt to write or checkpoint at the
same instant.
The bug is a data race with tight timing constraints and that requires
an unusual usage pattern.  It is unlikely
to occur in common use.  The developers were unable to reproduce
the bug organically and had to add special testing logic to SQLite
that deliberately triggers the circumstances of the the bug in order
to verify that the issue has been fixed.
11.1.
Bug Details
This is what happens:
One connection does a
checkpoint
.  This first checkpoint must be
complete.  In other words, the checkpoint must successfully copy all
content from the WAL file back into the database and leave the WAL file
in a state where it can potentially be reset.
Shortly after the first checkpoint completes, a second checkpoint
is started.
While the second checkpoint from step 2 is starting up, another database
connection commits a transaction that resets the WAL file and writes new
content into the beginning of the WAL file.
Due to a data race, the second checkpoint from step 2 does not realize
that the WAL file has been reset by the transaction commit in step 3.
The second checkpoint leaves a field in the header of the WAL-Index set
incorrectly.  That field indicates that part of the WAL file has already
been checkpointed, when in fact it has not been.
Additional transactions are committed to increase the number of pages
in the WAL file to be more than were present for the first checkpoint
from step 1.
Later when a third checkpoint occurs, the third checkpoint skips all
or part of the transaction that was written in step 3.  Thus parts of
the transaction from step 3 never reach the database file, and the
database file goes corrupt.
11.2.
Low Probability Of Occurrence
In order for this bug to happen, many details must align at just
the right moment.  So much so that the SQLite developers were unable
to reproduce the bug organically in the lab.  The only way the developers
have been able to cause the malfunction was to modify the SQLite sources
to invoke a callback controlled by
sqlite3_test_control()
that enables a test program or script to trigger the write transaction 
of step 3 at just the right moment during the second checkpoint.
Without that code hack, the problem has never been observed during 
development and testing.
UPDATE: 2026-08-24 →
Phil Eaton has devised
a reproducer that does not involve using the special testing code hack.
See
Another look at SQLite's WAL-Reset bug
for details.
This bug, though rare, does have serious consequences, and so
application developers should upgrade to a version of SQLite
that fixes the problem.
However, this is not an emergency.
Based on available telemetry, the occurrence rate of this problem in the
wild appears to be less than or equal to the expected occurrence rate of
SSD malfunctions and/or cosmic-ray hits.  So even if you are running an
unpatched version of SQLite, and unless you are doing something really
unusual, you are unlikely to ever encounter this problem.
This page was last updated on 2026-08-25 19:42:39Z